From The New York Times, [music] I'm
Natalie Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> On Monday, we looked at the growing
pushback against sprawling AI data
centers [music] in communities across
America.
Today, my colleague Kevin Roose
>> [music]
>> takes us inside one of the most
transformative technologies that
infrastructure is enabling.
A new way [music] of programming that
may be the biggest development in
artificial intelligence
>> [music]
>> since the launch of ChatGPT.
>> It's Wednesday, February 18th. [music]
Okay, so the other day I slacked you,
Kevin Roose, my colleague, my friend,
the host of The New York Times Tech
podcast, Hard Fork, and I asked you,
"What is vibe coding?" Because this is a
thing I had been hearing about and I had
no idea what it was. And you answered me
roughly in the tone that one might use
with their very elderly grandmother, I
think. Is that
>> [laughter]
>> fair to fair to say?
>> [gasps]
>> Well, I I am not agist. I I I think
people have lots of different levels of
comfort with technology. I think my tone
of voice was directed at you
specifically, Natalie, because I
[laughter] know that you are younger
than me and so you have no excuse to to
be this confused by technology. Yeah,
okay, fair enough. So, since then, I did
my own research as any young person
would do and I've come to the
understanding that vibe coding is in
fact very important. It appears to be
using AI in a way that is truly
revolutionary and I do think that I
cannot possibly be the only one who has
not caught up to this. And so, I want to
ask you to just start by laying out the
basics for those of us who aren't there
yet. What is vibe coding?
So, vibe coding is a term that was
coined about a year ago by a guy named
Andre Karpathy, who's a former
programmer at OpenAI, very well known
out here in Silicon Valley. And he was
describing this thing that he was doing
using these new AI coding tools, which
is that instead of learning a
programming language and writing the
code line by line by himself, he would
just sort of let the program write the
code for him and build software that
way. Let the vibes do the work. Let the
vibes do the work, exactly. And
suddenly, for the first time, about a
year ago, you didn't have to know how to
code to build software. You could just
use these tools, they would help you
along the way, and you could just kind
of oversee them as they worked.
So, what does that actually look like?
You experimented with it. What did that
do for you? Yeah, so I tried vibe coding
about a year ago when this term first
emerged, and I would build these little
test tools for myself. I built an app
called Lunchbox Buddy, which was
basically a way to help me pack my son's
lunch by just taking a photo of whatever
was in my fridge and giving it to the
tool and saying like, "What are the
different combinations of things I could
put in this four-compartment lunchbox?"
Oh my god, that's amazing. So useful,
[laughter] I want it.
Yeah, I I built some other stuff, too,
but honestly, it was kind of clunky. The
tools basically, you still needed to
know a little bit about programming to
be able to do this, and they were pretty
buggy. I tried to build some stuff to
help me sort through my emails, and it
couldn't do it. It was mostly useful to
professional programmers.
And it doesn't stay that way, I'd
imagine, because here we are talking
about it as something that is
revolutionary. So, what happened?
So, the big innovation between last year
and now is what is called agentic
coding. Agentic coding is basically just
a fancy way of saying an AI system that
can do much more of the process
autonomously. So, you still do have to
like have the idea for what you want to
build, but then with these new tools you
can just sort of give them a project and
they can make a plan, they can decide
what programming languages they want to
use. They can even create their own
little team of agents and say okay,
this agent's going to go off and do the
research, this agent's going to build
the website, this agent's going to test
it. And so you sort of have a little
team of robots working for you to do
whatever task you've given it. My dream,
a team of robots. Just sketch out why
that's a big deal, Kevin.
Well, because these models are getting
much better very quickly and they are
now able to do the kinds of tasks that
would take humans hours or sometimes
even days to do. And so they are working
their way up into the entry-level
functions in a lot of white-collar
industries. The models themselves are
also getting much better. They're not
hallucinating as much as they used to.
They're not making as many silly
mistakes as they used to. They are doing
better at things like reasoning and
solving complex math and science
problems than they used to. So, sort of
across the board, these things are
getting better at a pace that is
surprising even the people who are
building them.
Okay, I want to ask you about the
transformational potential of that,
about the impact on jobs, but first just
tell me at a really practical level,
where do you see these new tools? Like,
what or who is driving this agentic
phase?
So, this is largely being driven by a
handful of companies that are sort of
the leaders in this AI race. So, one of
them is OpenAI, the maker of ChatGPT.
They have a new agentic coding system
called Codex. I have been using Claude
Code, which is made by Anthropic,
another AI company. And these are the
tools that have come out just in the
past couple of months that have people
feeling like things are really
accelerating. Claude Code sort of blew
up. Millions of people have been using
it. They are doing increasingly complex
tasks with them. People are using these
in their jobs in the software industry.
And what's really changed is that if you
talk to people at the big AI companies
who used to program, who used to write
code by hand, they'll say, "I I don't
write any code anymore. I basically
supervise this team of agents, and I
kind of orchestrate them and set them
off toward tasks, and then I go get
lunch, and I come back, and the work is
done."
Okay, I want to understand this. I want
to understand the story of this. I think
we should pick one, and it sounds like
Claude Code has been the one that's been
blowing up. So, tell me the story of
this model. How did it start? How did it
get created?
>> [music]
>> So, this
app, Claude Code, started as a side
project. Basically, an engineer at
Anthropic named Boris Cherny had an
idea. He was trying to sort of get a
sense of what Claude, Anthropic's
chatbot, could do. So, he said, "Well,
what if I just give it my computer? What
if I install Claude inside the terminal
app, which is the app that you use to
write code and interface with your
computer if you're a programmer?
And what would happen if I just set
Claude loose inside my computer with a
bunch of tools? Like, give it the
ability to write [music] scripts, to
create files, to organize things, to
debug code." And he starts seeing
something really interesting happening
around the office.
His colleagues are starting to use this
tool to do their jobs. They're starting
to program with it.
It started with the engineers. They're
saying this is really great for [music]
coding. At first, it's maybe 20% of
their engineers, and then it's 40%, and
now all of them are using it. But, it's
also being used by people who are not
professional programmers, people in
marketing and sales and finance are
using this not to just build little
apps, but to automate parts of their
jobs.
So, it's like really catching on way
beyond, you know, the technical people.
Like normies are using it.
Exactly. What people have discovered is
that it can do lots of stuff. It can
automate your email. It can create
dashboards for things. It can reorganize
the files on your computer.
It's sort of like you just have a
computer that can use a computer now.
This is starting to blow my mind, but I
want to see it in action. Can we make
something together? Can you make
something for me? How How does this
work? Okay, I would love to show you.
So, what I'll do is I will share my
screen here.
I'm excited and a little scared.
>> [laughter]
>> Don't be scared. It'll be fine.
Okay. So, this is the terminal app. Have
you spent much time in the terminal app
on your computer? The answer is not
going to surprise you. No.
>> [laughter]
>> Okay. So, I had not either before I
started using Claude Code.
>> Okay, this looks technical though,
Kevin. Can I just say this is not my
chat GPT window.
No, this looks like hardcore programming
things. And I think the interface is
what has made a lot of people feel like
this is a tool that they can't use
because they don't write code. Right.
>> So, I will just say I do not write code.
I am not a coder. You're closer to me
than them, you're saying. I am much
closer to to you than them.
So, okay, here we are. We're inside
Cloud Code.
And I'm just going to give it a prompt.
I'm going to say build a website for my
colleague Natalie
Kitroeff. And I noticed Natalie that you
don't have a personal website, at least
that I could see. Do you have Do you
have one? I don't. I'm kind of given
over my identity to the New York Times.
>> you need one. You are a big-time podcast
host now, and so you need a website for
yourself. So, she's the co-host of The
Daily
and
the site should look How do you want it
to look? Sleek and professional? Yes,
and cool. Make me look cool, please.
Thank you.
>> And cool
>> [laughter]
>> and professional.
Make her
>> And also cool. Sorry. Thank you. Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> She really likes the Philadelphia
Eagles, so maybe do it in Eagles colors.
This is getting better and better.
All right, so I I hit enter, and it says
burrowing, which is one of its words
that it uses for thinking.
>> [music]
>> Do we know what it's doing? I promise
you I do not understand what it's doing.
>> [laughter]
>> Like a professional coder would know
what it is doing. Right.
>> All I know is that it's doing something.
And it's going to think about it, it's
going to make a plan, and then it's
going to start building. How long does
it take? It depends on the complexity of
the task. I've had [music] tasks that
have taken 10, 20, 30 minutes before,
but I think this is going to be just a
minute or two at most. And the idea is
that it's kind of scraping the internet
for information about me. Did you tell
it to make sure that everyone knows I'm
young, also? I'm just
>> [laughter]
>> We can add that in a subsequent version.
>> [music]
>> So, it wrote 644 lines of code.
Okay, so it's live. Let's just see what
it looks like together.
What was that, a minute? That took uh a
minute and 36 seconds.
Look at that. Wow. We've got a little
like Eagles green website.
>> see that. Oh my god, it knows that I was
in Mexico as a foreign correspondent.
Uh-huh. Oh, the spirit of the daily. The
best journalism doesn't just inform, it
makes you feel the weight of reality and
then pushes you to care.
It's a quote that is attributed to the
spirit of the daily.
Which is not a real person.
>> [laughter]
>> So, because I didn't give it a lot of
information, it uh it just sort of made
some stuff up to fill the space, but the
cool thing about this is now, if you
want to change it, you can just go into
this window and you can say,
"Hey, that's uh
fake quote. Can you make sure all the
info on the site is
accurate?" Yeah. I'm thinking we should
maybe add like an Easter egg to this. Um
something fun for for people who go to
your website and really want the full
Natalie Kitroeff experience. Okay.
What's it going to be? So, you're a big
football fan. There was a video game
called Tecmo Bowl, very early football
video game. And so, I would like to see
if we could put a version of Tecmo Bowl
that's playable, like a little playable
video game on your website.
>> Wow, can I also hire you? I feel like
you're good at this. You're good at
talking to Claude. So, I'm going to go
back to my terminal app here and I'm
going to say,
"That's great.
Could you add a playable
Tecmo Bowl style
video game to the site?"
Oh, it says, "This is going to be fun.
So, it's writing hundreds of lines of
code.
I mean,
this is insane. It's wild. I mean, this
is why people are freaking out about AI
right now, because this was not possible
even a couple of months ago, and now it
is.
Okay, so now our our video game is done.
Should we go see it? Yes, please.
Okay, so here's Natalie's Tech Mobile.
Oh my god.
>> And do you see it?
>> Oh my god. Yeah, I do. So, it says press
space to hike
and arrow keys to move. Okay, so Oh, we
got to run. We got to run. Oh. Touchdown
Eagles.
>> Yeah, go birds. This is incredible. Wow,
this is like I feel like I'm going to
draw a lot of people to my new website
with this feature. Yeah, you're going to
be getting so much traffic.
>> Okay.
>> [music]
>> So, that is Claude code, and that is how
these new coding tools work. How do you
feel? I feel pretty blown away. I
honestly can't believe that we just made
my first website, and that it has a
video game on it.
I have so many questions that I want to
ask you about it, and we'll do that
after the break. We'll be right back.
[music]
Kevin, I have to just acknowledge that
it is honestly an amazing feeling to see
this AI agent at work. It's probably the
first time that I have felt awe at this
technology since ChatGPT came out. It's
been a really long time, and there is
something a little bit unnerving about
it. And so, I just wonder for you, what
do you make of this moment? What do you
make of this change that we're seeing in
these tools?
Yeah, I think this is a big deal in the
world of AI. This is something that
people inside the AI industry have been
saying is coming for for long time, but
until recently, people couldn't really
see it for themselves or try it for
themselves. And, you know, ChatGPT has
been around for 3 years now, and for
most people, the novelty is sort of
wearing off. You know, it's a fancy
Google. You can get a meal plan. You can
sort of give it some questions. It can
help you write your emails or memos or
things like that. But, it doesn't sort
of shock you anymore. This feels
different to me and I think to a lot of
other people when you can actually build
something useful without knowing how to
write code. And I think this is what
people think is the thing that's going
to take AI from just kind of being a
fancier Google to something that
genuinely changes how people work.
When you say that this is something that
the tech companies have been saying is
coming [clears throat] for a long time,
what is the it that is coming? What
makes it special? Is it just the
complexity of the stuff it can do, or is
it the utility of it?
I think it's the utility, but it's also
the economic value. This kind of agentic
system can actually do work. It can do
tasks. It can perform things that humans
would have had to do by hand. So, it is
sort of a step in the direction of
making these things actually kind of
members of the workforce in some sense,
where you could have a company with some
human employees and then a whole bunch
of AI agents doing tasks. Okay, let's
talk about that because obviously when
we're talking about economic value, what
that presumably means for the people
that run these companies is lowering
labor costs by potentially eliminating
jobs.
Yeah, so that's the big question is will
this just help people at work? Will this
kind of agentic coding tool make people
faster and more efficient and more
productive and give them a new powerful
tool in their toolkit, or will it start
to replace people? We are starting to
see in the data some signs that this
kind of tool is maybe displacing young
software developers. There was a study
from Stanford recently that looked at
payroll records and found that
employment for young software engineers,
just people who are early in their
careers, has dropped about 20% from its
peak in late 2022. So, companies that
used to hire five or 10 people to write
code for them may only need one or two
now with a bunch of AI tools.
Can I ask, we were pointing to issues
with my beautiful website.
How good is this stuff? I mean, can it
debug itself? Because I guess I'm seeing
that there is also a lot of doubt and
skepticism that you can really do this
only with an AI tool at this point.
>> [gasps]
>> Well, coding is an interesting test
ground for this because in some sense it
is very verifiable. The code either runs
or it doesn't. And so, in some sense
it's very easy to tell. I mean, the
website we built you, it works. You can
go visit it on the web. It has a
playable video game inside of it.
>> Right.
>> So, yes, there are a lot of software
engineers who are still saying these
coding agents, they're not perfect, you
still kind of need to hold their hands
and oversee them if you want to get
really useful code that you could like
deploy inside of a big business, but
that is maybe temporary because they're
improving at a very rapid rate and we're
seeing that some of the things that
these tools couldn't do even a few
months ago it's now doing in ways that
are correct and and useful.
Well, can you just tell me quickly like
what's making this improve so quickly?
So, part of it is just that the models
themselves, the things that are sort of
underneath tools like Claude Code, are
just getting better very rapidly. And
part of that is because they're being
trained on more coding data. So, they're
sort of improving over time. The other
really interesting and really important
thing that is starting to happen is that
these AI tools are building versions of
themselves. They are starting to improve
themselves.
>> What? What does that mean?
So, OpenAI's latest coding model, which
is called GPT-5.3 Codex, was used to
help build itself. Early versions of the
model were used to make changes to the
training runs for later versions. So,
this is happening across all of the
leading AI companies right now, which is
that you have these systems which can
build websites, which can automate
certain financial or legal tasks. They
can also help train AI models. And so,
we're starting to see
>> So, AI models making AI models, just to
be clear about what we're saying here.
Yes.
Is that scary to you? Because it gives
me the vibe of a sci-fi reality.
Yeah, this is a sort of scenario that
we've heard about in science fiction for
years, where you have AIs that are
becoming increasingly capable. They're
building better and better AIs. Within
the AI community, there's this idea,
this phrase of of the intelligence
explosion, which is when you have these
systems that are doing what's known as
recursive self-improvement, building
better and better versions of
themselves. And so, that is one
possibility that these systems just
start to accelerate their improvements
to the point where they are sort of
doing all of this autonomously without
human involvement. Now, there are some
people who think this is still a
far-fetched scenario, but just look at
the trajectory. I mean, a year ago, you
had these very clunky AI vibe coding
tools. Now, they're running autonomously
for sometimes hours at a time. They can
build and maintain real software, and
they're starting to help build the next
versions of themselves. So, I think we
we are right to be paying attention to
this, and I think it's irresponsible to
sugarcoat what's happening. I have
[snorts] to say for the companies and
for the people that have been involved
in AI, this also has to really be a kind
of proof of concept moment for them
because there has been so much
skepticism about AI over the last year.
A lot of fear about frothiness in the
market, about whether we're in a bubble,
about whether AI is really going to live
up to its potential. And what you've
described is a transformative tool that
can be incredibly useful. And with that,
the potential for real job loss. So, any
way you slice it, this is AI doing what
they said it probably would.
Yeah, it is. And I think, you know, I
don't blame people for questioning last
year whether we were in an AI bubble. I
think most people up to that point had
only used things like ChatGPT, which
are, you know, very capable on their
own, but I can understand why people
would look at that and then look at the
billions of dollars being spent on data
centers and infrastructure and think
like, "Okay, isn't this a little bit
much?" But the bet that these AI
companies were making is that you could
actually turn this stuff into useful
tools that would be able to do real
valuable work in the economy.
And I think we are starting to see that
bet pay off.
Kevin, I think it's worth pausing here
for a moment. Like, it's very easy to
talk about job loss from all this in the
abstract, but at a practical level, if a
whole class of workers just lose their
jobs, if those jobs cease to exist, we'd
be talking about a pretty massive impact
on the economy writ large. And I mean,
this could hypothetically just be the
very beginning of agents like these can
do other forms of work, you could see
many more jobs wiped out. So, I just
want to ask, how likely is it really
that these tools create that kind of job
loss? And what are the AI companies
saying about it?
So, I'll answer the first part, which is
that I don't know how likely it is. I
have intuitions and guesses, but no one
really knows how this is going to go. It
could be that there's a short-term spike
in the demand for software engineers
because everyone's building new kinds of
software, and they need people to manage
it all. Mhm. And it could be that these
tools just never wipe out millions of
jobs en masse. But the AI companies and
the people who run the companies are
increasingly worried about this. So,
Dario Amodei, who's the CEO of
Anthropic, which makes Claude, has
warned that he believes that AI could
potentially eliminate half of all
entry-level white-collar jobs within the
next 5 years. Wow. So, that could be
wildly off, but even if it were
partially true, even if it were 10% or
20%,
that would still be a massive change to
the labor market and to the lives of
millions of people. Yeah, there's
something deeply unsettling about all of
that. Yeah, I agree, and I myself feel
very uncertain about this. And I think
there are a lot of people in the tech
industry who are very excited about
these tools cuz it's letting them, you
know, build a bunch of stuff very
quickly.
But as I'm hearing from more people in
white-collar, knowledge-work fields,
they're just very anxious right now.
People are really uncertain. They don't
know if the skills they're building are
obsolete. College students don't know
what they should be studying so they can
get a job after they graduate. People
are really getting nervous about how
quickly this technology is improving and
the possibility that it could make the
future look very different.
Okay, and I want to ask about that
future. I mean,
are we on a runaway train? The speed
with which this is changing feels hard
to even capture, honestly. And I wonder
if you think about the progress made
over 1 year,
what's the next year? What can we
expect?
I mean, my honest prediction is that a
year from now these agentic tools will
be dramatically better, right? They'll
handle big complex problems. You won't
have to hold their hand as much. They
will become full-fledged members of the
workforce. And, you know, a lot of
companies will still do things the old
way cuz institutions are very slow to
change, as we know. But, there will be
this sort of new kind of company that is
emerging with AI work at the center of
it. And, I think that's going to be a
really fast-growing part of the economy.
I think the job market impacts that
we're starting to see hints of today
will become much clearer a year from
now. But, honestly, I lose a lot of
visibility myself. I mean, I have
stopped trying to predict more than
about 6 months out because that's about
as far as I can see right now. I would
not have predicted a year ago when vibe
coding first came into my consciousness
that it was going to be capable of doing
all of this today.
>> [music]
>> So, I think the most we can say right
now is that these tools are getting
better at a at a very fast and
accelerating rate, and that they keep
doing things that are surprising and
useful.
And, there's a lot of unknowns about
what that will mean for the future of
human work.
Kevin,
one of my favorite humans, thank you so
much for coming on the show. I really
appreciate it. You're welcome. And, we
should also thank Claude, who built you
that beautiful website.
>> Thank you, Claude.
>> [laughter]
>> He's been a good bot. He has. Yeah.
>> [music]
>> For more on the latest developments in
agentic coding, listen to Hard Fork
>> [music]
>> wherever you get your podcasts.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
[music]
We meet tonight at the crossroads,
at point of decision.
>> [music]
>> Shall we expand,
be inclusive,
find unity and power,
or suffer division and impotence?
The Reverend Jesse Jackson,
>> [music]
>> America's most influential black leader
in the decades between the death of
Martin Luther King Jr. and the election
of Barack Obama as president, died on
Tuesday.
He was 84.
I know abandonment,
and people being mean to you,
and saying you're nothing and nobody,
>> [music]
>> and can never be anything.
I understand.
Jackson, [music] who worked closely with
Dr. King, became the first black man to
mount a major nationwide campaign for
president.
In his 1988 campaign, [music] Jackson
turned his own life story, which began
in poverty, into a rallying cry for a
new kind of Democratic Party. [music]
I understand.
I wasn't born in the hospital.
>> [music]
>> Mama didn't have insurance.
I really do understand.
Born in a three-room house.
Bathroom in the backyard.
>> [music]
>> Slop jar by the bed.
No hot and cold running water. In one
[music] of his most famous speeches,
delivered at the Democratic National
Convention in 1988, Jackson declared
that his life experience had taught him
that what bound working Americans was
not [music] party, nor race, but the
shared experience of struggle. I'm a
working person's person.
That's why I understand you whether
you're black or white. I understand
work.
Jackson won almost 7 million votes in
the Democratic primary for president. I
was born in the slum,
but the slum was not born in me. He
failed to win the nomination,
but he'd cemented his place [music] as a
defining figure in American public life.
>> make it.
Hold your head high.
>> [music]
>> Stick your chest out.
You can make it.
IT GETS DARK SOMETIMES, [music]
BUT THE MORNING COMES.
Don't you surrender.
SUFFERING BREEDS CHARACTER.
CHARACTER BREEDS FAITH. IN THE END,
FAITH WILL NOT BE THE SUPPORT.
WE MUST NEVER SURRENDER.
AMERICA WILL GET BETTER
and better.
Keep hope alive.
On tomorrow night, [music]
and beyond,
keep hope alive.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced [music] by
Nina Feldman, Ricky Novetsky, and Olivia
Nat, with help from Devon Greenleaf and
Mustafa Mirza.
It was edited by Brendan Klinkenberg,
Paige [music] Cowett, and Lisa Chow.
Contains music by Diane Wong, Dan
Powell, [music]
and Will Reed, and was engineered by
Chris Wood.
That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff.
See you tomorrow.
>> [music]
>> Mhm.